book: document "logrotate" (#2390)
status-im/nim-beacon-chain: docs/the_nimbus_book/src/log-rotate.md

# Log rotation

Nimbus logs are written to stdout, and optionally to a file. Writing to a file for a long-running process may lead to difficulties when the file grows large. This is typically solved with a *log rotator*. A log rotator is responsible for switching the written-to file, as well as compressing and removing old logs.

## Using "logrotate"

> Most systems rely on [logrotate](https://github.com/logrotate/logrotate) for log rotation and compression. The corresponding package will install its Cron hooks (or Systemd timer) -- all you have to do is add a configuration file for Nimbus-eth2 in "/etc/logrotate.d/nimbus-eth2":

Reviewer: eh, that would need quantification - with systemd, most systems rely on `journald` - we can keep this section neutral between logrotate and rotatelogs, for all intents and purposes - though the copytruncate option may leave gaps which is why rotatelogs strictly fits nimbus' needs better - also, thinking about it, it probably makes sense to use sed to strip logs instead of rebuilding nbc - specially when we're directing people to use the binary (https://superuser.com/a/380778)

Reviewer: as in, it doesn't matter what most systems use - it's better to just note that one possible config is logrotate

Author: > with systemd, most systems rely on journald

I actually started by trying to document log rotation with Journald, but I can't find a way that doesn't involve using another logging daemon (syslog-ng, rsyslog, etc) to fetch those logs from Journald, write them again on the disk, then use logrotate to rotate those duplicated logs.

The best I can do for Journald alone is to put limits on the log size, but that's not rotation.

> it doesn't matter what most systems use - it's better to just note that one possible config is logrotate

Sure. Let me reword that.

Author: Done.

> Most systems rely on [logrotate](https://github.com/logrotate/logrotate) for log rotation and compression. The corresponding package will install its Cron hooks (or Systemd timer) and all you have to do is add a configuration file for Nimbus-eth2 in "/etc/logrotate.d/nimbus-eth2":

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most systems rely on [logrotate](https://github.com/logrotate/logrotate) for log rotation and compression. The corresponding package will install its Cron hooks (or Systemd timer) -- all you have to do is add a configuration file for Nimbus-eth2 in "/etc/logrotate.d/nimbus-eth2":
```

```text
/var/log/nimbus-eth2/*.log {

> 	compress

Reviewer: copytruncate an compress may interfere with nimbus' use of the disk and cpu - would be better with `nice` / `ionice`

Author: Yes, but is it worth the increase in complexity?

Reviewer: well, that's where we have the most issues right now - disk io and lack of cpu during bursty periods which in turn leads to inclusion delays which is bad for rewards - this was the original motivation to _not_ recommend logrotate and look for alternatives.

Reviewer: this is specially so on raspberries and the like where these things matter quite a lot - `rotatelogs` does exactly what nimbus needs (based on how it currently works), which is to minimize io and have a script for compression that allows tuning it

Author: Your `rotatelogs` setup was missing stderr logging and old log file deletion. If that's not proof of overly complicated...

Reviewer: `stderr` should go to to the system log, that's on purpose (and perhaps a matter of taste) but I want `systemctl status` to show them separately

ditto removal of old files - there's a way to do that with rotatelogs but whatever. like mentioned, the difference in performance matters on low-end devices - I would go as far as saying that we should update nimbus' logging capabilities to avoid the copytruncate option _before_ recommending logrotate, based on the performance work I've done so far.

Author: > stderr should go to to the system log

That's how you get silent crashes and surprised users.

> the difference in performance matters on low-end devices

So does running out of disk space due to logs.

	missingok
	copytruncate
}
```

> This assumes you configured Nimbus-eth2 to write its logs to "/var/log/nimbus-eth2/" (usually by redirecting stout and stderr from your init script).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above assumes you've configured Nimbus-eth2 to write its logs to "/var/log/nimbus-eth2/" (usually by redirecting stout and stderr from your init script).
```

Author: "Nimbus-eth2" is the project's name. There is no binary called "nimbus-eth2".

> "copytruncate" is required, because `logrotate`'s default behaviour of moving the log file requires application support for re-opening that log file at runtime and that is currently lacking. So, instead of a move, we tell `logrotate` to do a copy and a truncation of the existing file. A few log lines may be lost in the process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"copytruncate" is required because, when it comes to moving the log file, `logrotate`'s default behaviour requires application support for re-opening that log file at runtime (something which is currently lacking). So, instead of a move, we tell `logrotate` to do a copy and a truncation of the existing file. A few log lines may be lost in the process.
```

> You can control rotation frequency and the maximum number of log files kept by using the global configuration file - "/etc/logrotate.conf":

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can control the rotation frequency and the maximum number of log files kept by using the global configuration file - "/etc/logrotate.conf":
```

Author: Unnecessary repetition of "the".

Reviewer 2: disagree :)

```text
# rotate daily
daily
# only keep logs from the last 7 days
rotate 7
```

## Using "rotatelogs"

[rotatelogs](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/programs/rotatelogs.html) is available on most servers and can be used with `Docker`, `Systemd` and manual setups to write rotated logs files.

> In particular, when using `Systemd` and its accompanying `Journald` log daemon, this setup avoids clogging the system log by keeping the Nimbus logs in a separate location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In particular, when `Systemd` and its accompanying `Journald` log daemon are used, this setup avoids clogging the system log by keeping the Nimbus logs in a separate location.
```

### Compression

> `rotatelogs` works by reading stdin and redirecting it to a file based on a name pattern. Whenever the log is about to be rotated, the application invokes a shell script with the old and new log files. Our aim is to compress the log file to save space. The [Nimbus-eth2 repo](https://github.com/status-im/nimbus-eth2/tree/unstable/scripts/rotatelogs-compress.sh) provides a helper script to do so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`rotatelogs` works by reading stdin and redirecting it to a file based on a name pattern. Whenever the log is about to be rotated, the application invokes a shell script with the old and new log files. Our aim is to compress the log file to save space. The [Nimbus-eth2 repo](https://github.com/status-im/nimbus-eth2/tree/unstable/scripts/rotatelogs-compress.sh) provides a helper script that does this:
```

* `-f` - opens the log immediately when starting `rotatelogs`
* `-c "$DATADIR/log/nbc_bn_%Y%m%d%H%M%S.log"` - includes timestamp in log filename
* `3600` - rotates logs every hour (3600 seconds)

### Deleting old logs

> `rotatelogs` will not do this for you, so you need a Cron script (or Systemd timer) for that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`rotatelogs` will not do this for you, so you'll need a Cron script (or Systemd timer):
```
